# The Blockchain and games: a long term partership

### Emergence of The Virtual Economy

8 years before the release of Bitcoin in 2009, [Brock Pierce](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brock_Pierce), co-founder of EOS and chairman of the Bitcoin foundation, has pioneered the field of in-game asset monetization creating Internet Gaming Entertainment Ltd (IGE). Created at first to help players exchange digitial assets in the game EverQuest, [IGE offered not only the virtual commodities in exchange for real money but also provided professional customer service.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_economy#Black_market). A very lucrative underground market of virtual commodities, a so called [Virtual Economy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_economy#Black_market), has emerged mainly around World of Warcraft assets, with IGE enjoying a central position. Going against game manufacturer's terms and condition, IGE was on the edge of legality and faced a [class action lawsuit](https://en.wikinews.org/wiki/Lawsuit:_Hernandez_vs_IGE) in 2007. Blizzard Entertainement went into a raging battle against this "black market" around 2007.

A decisive blow to IGE was to include such virtual assets trading features inside the game itself and to modify the game monetization strategies accordingly. For exemple, in 2011, Blizzard introduced its own market place for digital assets inside Diablo III via a currency-based auction house called... the Auction House. Later, [by 2015, Blizzard attempted to stabilize the in-game economy of World of Warcraft by introducing the WoW Token, which let players exchange virtual gold for real currency.](https://cryptobriefing.com/video-games-mining-cryptocurrency/). The secondary market has shrinked a lot due to these clever stategic moves but it made the big players of the industry realize that they could not go against the emerging Virtual Economy and might as well try to make a profit out of it. Many of the small players in this industry had understood this earlier, especially the mobile game devellopers. For example, free-to-play games are now becoming main-stream, especially on mobile platforms, and the way profit is generated in these games is through the purchase of in-game assets by the player. Since the emergence of the Virtual Economy, monetization of games is evolving rapidly and will continue to do so.

After the relative downfall of the Virtual Market and the difficulties of his own venture, IGE, Brock Pierce switched his investements toward cryptocurrency and blockchain technologies. In 2018, Brock Pierce was within the top 20 richest people in crypto according to the [Forbes magasize](https://www.forbes.com/richest-in-cryptocurrency/#7718219f1d49). It is not by chance that one of the biggest names in crypto was a former investor in the virtual economy around video games. As we will see, there is a close relationship between gamers and the crypto world. 



### Gamers as early adopters
For now, video game code is closed-source and the trading history of in-game assets is stored on centralized server. This means that the in-game markets introduced by game manufacturers are totally opaque to the players. For the average consumer, transparency is not that much of an issue, but for players having a lot of stake in the game, it can be a major concern. More and more gamers in the community start to be worried about transparency concerning their virtual assets. For many players, distributed ledger technology such as the blockchain might finaly enable the emergence of a true decentralized Virtual Market. It is not a surprise that the proportion of token holders in the gaming community is very high compared to the general public. 

Gamers represent a huge bassin of potential early adopters for blockchain technologies and cryptocurrencies. This is good news, because cryptocurrencies currently have bad press, and for good reasons. Besides using a [tremendous amount of energy](https://montrealgazette.com/business/hydro-quebec-considers-raising-rates-for-bitcoin-miners) for securing the network with the Proof-of-Work consensus algorithm, cryptos vacilitated [money laundering and payments for illicite activities](https://medium.com/s/story/cryptocurrencys-criminal-revolution-6dae3cdf630f) as well as a powering a [wild speculative market](https://medium.com/@Melt_Dem/drowning-in-tokens-184ccfa1641a). Having a first convincing use-case for cryptos in the video game industry would create a natural demand for cryptos and might hopefully contribute to dampen the price fluctuations. It seams like the blockchain is at the edge of a first wave of mass adoption by the gamers. But if monetization of in-games assets is such a convincing use-case for blockchain technologies, why is it that 9 years after Bitcoin release they have not yet been widely adopted? To answer this question, we will have to dive deeper into the technology itself.

### The current state of blockchain games

The missing building block for powering the Virtual Economy was a blockchain plateform where smart contracts can be deployed and executed in a decentralized manner. The first of these plateform came in july 2015. It was Ethereum. Since then, we have witnessed the emergence of many decentralized applications (Dapps) a good protion of them being blockchain games. The popularity of these blockchain games is undeniable (crypto zombies, crypto kitties, etc.) despite the obvious lack of gameplay of these early games and their primitive game mechanics. Even though the first blockchain games were more "buy low, sell high" speculative games, they are here to stay and they will become more and more diverse, complexe and fun. 

But technological constrains remain that hinder the devellopers from offering a satisfying user experience to the player. These are the same constrains that hold back the adoption of blockchain technologies for the Virtual Market.

1. Transaction fees: how do you pay your miners who are responsible for the network security?
2. Transaction rate: the ever calling question of scalability
3. Security: Can you really trust your users to keep their private key safe?

Through the [P2PMTL Blockchain Game Workshop](http://eventbrite.ca), we will build our first blockchain game. It will be an opportunity to experiment with these three technological constrains, understand the interplay between them and apprehend their impact on the user experience. After the tutorial, we will investigate tools available to devellopers to improve user experience of there blockchain games. We will compare three smart contract plateforms (Ethereum, EOS and Loom Network) in terms of consensus, a design parameter specific to decentralized applications (Dapps) on the blockchain. 

